Code repo docs (#1448)
zenml-io/zenml: docs/book/advanced-guide/practical/code-repositories.md

Reviewer: This file is in practical.. I feel like this can be moved as discussed ... If not in the starter guide then maybe in In-depth configuration?

Author: I thought about it and seems too advanced compared to other stuff in the starter guide which is just "the essentials". What do you think of putting it as a "root" page in the advanced guide instead of putting it in `practical` or `configuration`? It doesn't really fit anywhere any having it on the main page might give it more visibility?

Reviewer: @schustmi Not to sure we want to break the paradigm... But how about another sub-section in "Starter Guide" which continues from collaboration and we can call it "Managing ZenML".

This section can include:

- Code repository
- Containerization
- Materializers
- Runtime Settings
- Secrets Management

Author: Not sure "Managing ZenML" really describes what these things do, but I like the idea of having another section in the starter guide for those pages!

Author: Any other suggestions? I can't really come up with anything that I like, these concepts are just all over the place..
`Configuration` covers some of them, but secrets don't fit in there IMO

Reviewer: ChatGPT: Based on the concepts you mentioned, a possible name for this section could be "Deployment Essentials" or "Deployment Fundamentals". These names suggest that the section covers the essential components and concepts necessary to deploy ZenML in production, including code management, containerization, runtime settings, materializers, and secrets management.

I'd say maybe "Production Fundamentals" or "Production Essentials"?

Author: I'm on board with both of those, let's go with `Production Fundamentals`?

Maybe leave the materializers out of that and include:
- runtime settings
- step resources/GPU
- Containerization
- Secrets
- code repo

What do you think?

Reviewer: IMO Materializers are very important to learn about in the starter guide so lets keep them there.. But happy to have that name

Author: Actually thinking about it for some time: If I were a user and looking for a docs page to write a custom materializer or how to configure my pipeline/stack, the last place I would click on would be `Production Fundamentals`. Might be just me, but somehow I would expect SSO and stuff in there, not the pages that we planned.

The overarching problem IMO is just the overall doc structure. The only pages that are immediately obvious to me is the component gallery, because it's a structured section of the different types and flavors of stack components. The rest is somehow trying to fit into a structure that doesn't make too much sense and therefore makes it unnecessarily complicated to find stuff. Personally, a simple list of just all pages would probably be easier to digest and look for stuff than what we currently have..

Author: Our current starter guide is good for sequential reading, but most people will probably not read through docs for a long time, and instead search for specific features once they have the need for it

Reviewer: Maybe then take materializer out and leave your suggestion in and we deal with this later

---
description: How to track the code of your pipelines
---

## What is a code repository

> 

Reviewer: Again needs a visualization of what is different using a code repository and what happens when not using it

Code repositories can be registered using the CLI:
```shell
zenml code-repository register <NAME> --type=<TYPE> [--CODE_REPOSITORY_OPTIONS]
```

For concrete options, check out the section on the [`GitHubCodeRepository`](#github),
the [`GitLabCodeRepository`](#gitlab) or how to develop and register a
[custom code repository implementation](#developing-a-custom-code-repository).

### Detecting local code repository checkouts

Once you have registered one or more code repositories, ZenML will check whether the files
you use when running a pipeline are tracked inside one of those code repositories. This happens
as follows:
* First, the [source root](../../reference/glossary.md#source-root) is computed
* Next, ZenML checks whether this source root directory is included in a local checkout of one
of the registered code repositories

### Tracking code version for pipeline runs

If a [local code repository checkout](#detecting-local-code-repository-checkouts) is detected
when running a pipeline, ZenML will store a reference the current commit for the pipeline run
so you'll be able to know exactly which code was used. Note that this reference is only tracked

> if your local checkout is clean (which means it does not contain any untracked or uncommitted files).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if your local checkout is clean (i.e. it does not contain any untracked or uncommitted files).
```

This is to ensure that your pipeline is actually running with the exact code stored at the specific
code repository commit.

### Speeding up Docker builds for containerized components

When using containerized components in your stack, ZenML needs to build Docker images to
remotely execute your code. If you're not using a code repository, this code will be included

> in the Docker images that ZenML builds. This however means that new Docker images will be built and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the Docker images that ZenML builds. This, however, means that new Docker images will be built and
```

pushed whenever you make changes to any of your source files. When running a pipeline that is
part of a [local code repository checkout](#detecting-local-code-repository-checkouts), ZenML
can instead build the Docker images without including any of your source files, and download
the files inside the container before running your code. This greatly speeds up the building
process and also allows you to re-use images that one of your colleagues might have built for
the same stack.

Some additional points:

> - The file download is only possible if the local checkout is clean (which means it does

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The file download is only possible if the local checkout is clean (i.e. it does
```

not contain any untracked or uncommitted files) and the latest commit has been pushed to
the remote repository. This is necessary as otherwise the file download inside the Docker
container will fail.

> - If you want to disable or enforce the download of files, check out

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If you want to disable or enforce the downloading of files, check out
```

ZenML pipelines. You can register a GitHub code repository by providing the URL
of the GitHub instance, the owner of the repository, the name of the repository,
and a GitHub Personal Access Token (PAT) with access to the repository.

```shell
zenml code-repository register <NAME> --type=github \
--url=<GITHUB_URL> --owner=<OWNER> --repository=<REPOSITORY> \
--token=<GITHUB_TOKEN>
```

where <NAME> is the name of the code repository you are registering, <OWNER> is
the owner of the repository, <REPOSITORY> is the name of the repository, 
<GITHUB_TOKEN> is your GitHub Personal Access Token and <GITHUB_URL> is the URL
of the GitHub instance which defaults to `https://github.com.` You will need to
set a URL if you are using GitHub Enterprise.

After registering the GitHub code repository, ZenML will automatically detect
if your source files are being tracked by GitHub and store the commit hash for
each pipeline run.

<details>

<summary>How To get a token for GitHub</summary>

1. Go to your GitHub account settings and click on "Developer settings".
2. Select "Personal access tokens" and click on "Generate new token".

> 3. Give your token a name and select the scopes that you need (e.g. repo, admin:repo_hook, user).

Reviewer 3: @schustmi hmm that actually is a good point, I will add that

> 3. Give your token a name and select the scopes that you need (e.g. repo, admin:repo_hook, user).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Give your token a name and select the scopes that you need (e.g. `repo`, `admin:repo_hook`, `user`).
```

ZenML also provides built-in support for using GitLab as a code repository for
your ZenML pipelines. You can register a GitLab code repository by providing the
URL of the GitLab project, the group of the project, the name of the project,
and a GitLab Personal Access Token (PAT) with access to the project.

To register a GitLab code repository, run the following CLI command:

```shell
zenml code-repository register <NAME> --type=gitlab \
--url=<GITLAB_URL> --group=<GROUP> --project=<PROJECT> \
--token=<GITLAB_TOKEN>
```

where <NAME> is the name of the code repository you are registering, <GROUP> is
the group of the project, <PROJECT> is the name of the project, <GITLAB_TOKEN>
is your GitLab Personal Access Token and <GITLAB_URL> is the URL of the GitLab
instance which defaults to `https://gitlab.com.` You will need to set a URL if
you have a self-hosted GitLab instance.

After registering the GitLab code repository, ZenML will automatically detect
if your source files are being tracked by GitLab and store the commit hash for
each pipeline run.

<details>

<summary>How To get a token for GitLab</summary>

1. Go to your GitLab account settings and click on "Access Tokens".

> 2. Select the scopes that you need (e.g. read_repository, write_repository).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Select the scopes that you need (e.g. `read_repository`, `write_repository`).
```

> 2. Select the scopes that you need (e.g. read_repository, write_repository).

Reviewer 2: Agreed. If possible we should not just give examples of the necessary scopes, but list them all.
